.TH MUXM 1 "2026-04-11" "MuxMaster v1.4.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
muxm \- Universal AV1/DV/HLG/HDR10/SDR video encoder/muxer with format profiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B muxm
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fB\-\-\fR] \fIsource\fR [\fItarget\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
MuxMaster converts and muxes video for various playback targets including
Apple TV direct play, Plex/Jellyfin streaming, archival storage, animation
workflows, and universal compatibility. It handles Dolby Vision
(extract/convert/inject), HDR/HLG/SDR color handling, tone-mapping HDR to
SDR, audio selection/transcoding, and subtitle selection with optional
PGS\(->SRT OCR.
.PP
Configuration layers (lowest to highest precedence):
.PP
Defaults \(-> /etc/.muxmrc \(-> ~/.muxmrc \(-> ./.muxmrc \(-> \-\-profile \(-> CLI flags
.PP
.B muxm
requires
.B bash 4.3
or later. macOS ships bash\ 3.2; install a modern version
(e.g.,
.BR "brew install bash" )
and ensure it appears first in
.BR PATH .
.SH FORMAT PROFILES
Profiles are named presets that configure muxm for a specific use case in a
single flag. Every setting a profile changes can be individually overridden
with CLI flags.
.TP
.B \-\-profile \fINAME\fR[,\fINAME\fR,...]
Select one or more encoding profiles. When a single name is given, the pipeline
runs once with that profile's settings. When multiple names are separated by
commas (e.g. \fB\-\-profile youtube\-upload,streaming\-hevc\fR), each profile runs as
a separate sequential pass from the same source.
.PP
In multi\-profile mode, output files are auto\-suffixed with the profile name
(e.g. \fIsource.youtube\-upload.mp4\fR, \fIsource.streaming\-hevc.mp4\fR). If an
explicit output filename is provided, its stem and directory are used as the
base; its extension is ignored (each profile determines its own container). A
warning listing all output paths is printed before encoding starts.
.PP
.\" NOTE: Profile names below must match VALID_PROFILES in muxm (Section 2).
Available profiles:
.TP
.B archive
Remux\-first archival. DV + HDR10, multi\-track, copy only. Passthrough container
(MKV sources stay MKV, MP4 sources stay MP4). Commentary/descriptive audio tracks
dropped by default.
Audio filterable via
.BR AUDIO_LANG_PREF " and " AUDIO_KEEP_COMMENTARY ;
subtitles filterable via
.BR SUB_LANG_PREF ", " SUB_INCLUDE_FORCED / FULL / SDH ", and " SUB_MAX_TRACKS .
Skip if already ideal. JSON report.
.PP
The former name
.B dv\-archival
is accepted as a backwards\-compatible alias and emits a deprecation notice.
.TP
.B hdr10\-hq
Strip DV, keep HDR10. CRF 17, lossless audio + stereo fallback. MKV.
.TP
.B atv\-directplay\-hq
Apple TV Direct Play. DV\-aware, E\-AC\-3. Passthrough container
(MKV sources stay MKV, MP4 sources stay MP4). HEVC Main10, DV P8.1,
AAC stereo fallback. Forced subs burned for MP4; soft with native ASS preservation for MKV.
.TP
.B atv\-directplay\-animation
Apple TV Direct Play, animation quality. CRF 16, E\-AC\-3, ASS/SSA + PGS bitmap subs.
Passthrough container. HEVC 10\-bit (even SDR), animation\-tuned x265,
multi\-track subs. Lossless audio transcoded to E\-AC\-3 (ATV cannot Direct Play TrueHD/DTS\-HD MA).
Forced subs burned for MP4; soft with native ASS preservation for MKV.
.TP
.B streaming\-hevc
HEVC CRF 20 for Plex/Jellyfin. HDR10, E\-AC\-3. MP4. Preset medium,
AAC stereo. Targets Shield, Fire TV, Roku, smart TVs, web.
The former name
.B streaming
is accepted as a backwards\-compatible alias and emits a deprecation notice.
.TP
.B av1\-hq
High\-quality AV1 archival via SVT\-AV1. CRF 20, preset 6. HDR10 preserved,
DV disabled. MKV. Lossless audio passthrough with AAC stereo fallback.
SHA\-256 checksum. VMAF 93.48 at 4K HDR (parity with HEVC CRF 18).
See
.I docs/AV1_CALIBRATION.md
for methodology.
.TP
.B streaming\-av1
AV1 streaming. CRF 30, preset 6. Opus 256k surround
.RB ( AUDIO_FORCE_BITRATE=256k ),
AAC stereo fallback. MP4 container.
Optimized for platforms that accept AV1 (YouTube, Netflix ingest).
VMAF 97.70 at 1080p SDR, 90.65 at 4K HDR.
.TP
.B animation
Anime/cartoon. CRF 16, lossless audio, ASS subs. MKV. HEVC 10\-bit (even SDR),
animation\-tuned x265 (low psy\-rd, adjusted deblock, extra b\-frames),
multi\-track subs (ASS/SSA + PGS bitmap).
.TP
.B universal
H.264 SDR, AAC stereo. Lean, play anywhere. MP4. Tone\-map HDR, burn forced subs,
strip chapters/metadata.
.TP
.B youtube\-upload
H.264 high\-profile, CRF 16, preset slow. AAC stereo 256k, burn forced subs,
export full subs as external SRT. MP4. Strips metadata, keeps chapters.
No tone\-mapping (YouTube handles HDR). Designed for master\-quality uploads.
.SH COMMON OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show condensed usage and available profiles.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version.
.TP
.BR \-\-dry\-run
Plan steps without encoding/muxing (creates placeholders only).
.TP
.BR \-\-print\-effective\-config
Show the resolved configuration after all sources merge, then exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-setup
Run full first\-time setup: installs dependencies, the manual page, and
tab completion in a single command. Equivalent to running
\fB\-\-install\-dependencies\fR, \fB\-\-install\-man\fR, and
\fB\-\-install\-completions\fR in sequence.
.TP
.BR \-\-install\-dependencies
Check and install required/optional tools via Homebrew and pipx.
.TP
.BR \-\-install\-man
Install this manual page to the system man directory. Uses sudo if the
target directory is not writable. Detects Homebrew prefix automatically.
.TP
.BR \-\-uninstall\-man
Remove the installed manual page.
.TP
.BR \-\-install\-completions
Install bash/zsh tab\-completion to \fI~/.muxm/\fR and add a
\fBsource\fR line to the user's shell RC files
(\fI~/.bashrc\fR, \fI~/.bash_profile\fR, \fI~/.zshrc\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-uninstall\-completions
Remove the tab\-completion file from \fI~/.muxm/\fR and clean
the \fBsource\fR lines from shell RC files.
.TP
.BR \-\-create\-config " " \fISCOPE\fR " " [\fIPROFILE\fR]
Generate a \fI.muxmrc\fR config file at the location specified by \fISCOPE\fR
and exit. Profile\-specific variables are uncommented and set; all other
variables are commented with defaults.
.RS
.TP
.B system
writes to \fI/etc/.muxmrc\fR (may require sudo)
.TP
.B user
writes to \fI~/.muxmrc\fR
.TP
.B project
writes to \fI$PWD/.muxmrc\fR
.RE
.IP
\fIPROFILE\fR defaults to \fBatv\-directplay\-hq\fR if omitted.
Refuses to overwrite an existing file; use \fB\-\-force\-create\-config\fR
to overwrite.
.PP
Additional CLI flags may follow the scope and profile to pre\-populate specific
values. For example, \fB\-\-create\-config user atv\-directplay\-hq \-\-crf 20
\-\-preset medium\fR generates a config with \fBCRF_VALUE=20\fR and
\fBPRESET_VALUE="medium"\fR uncommented. Supported overrides include
\fB\-\-crf\fR, \fB\-\-preset\fR, \fB\-\-output\-ext\fR, \fB\-\-level\fR,
\fB\-\-video\-codec\fR, \fB\-\-stereo\-bitrate\fR, \fB\-\-sub\-lang\-pref\fR,
\fB\-\-audio\-lang\-pref\fR, and common boolean toggles. Unrecognized flags
produce an error. Without overrides, behaviour is unchanged.
.TP
.BR \-\-force\-create\-config " " \fISCOPE\fR " " [\fIPROFILE\fR]
Same as \fB\-\-create\-config\fR but overwrites an existing file.
.SH VIDEO OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-crf " " \fIN\fR
Video quality CRF (lower = higher quality). Typical: 16\(en22.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-preset " " \fINAME\fR
Encoder preset: ultrafast \fIto\fR placebo. Default: slower.
.TP
.BR \-\-video\-codec " " libx265|libx264|libsvt\-av1|libaom\-av1
Video encoder. Default: libx265 (HEVC). Use \fBlibsvt\-av1\fR for SVT\-AV1
or \fBlibaom\-av1\fR for libaom AV1.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-level " " \fIN\fR
x265 level\-idc (e.g., 5.1). Not applied for AV1 codecs — AV1 level
selection is handled by the encoder automatically.
.TP
.BR \-\-x265\-params " " \fISTR\fR
Advanced x265 parameter string.
.TP
.BR \-\-x264\-params " " \fISTR\fR
Advanced x264 parameter string (used by
.B youtube\-upload
profile; e.g.,
.BR "profile=high:rc-lookahead=60:aq-mode=2:aq-strength=1.0" ).
.TP
.BR \-\-av1\-params " " \fISTR\fR
SVT\-AV1 parameter string passed via \fB\-svtav1\-params\fR. Colon\-separated
key=value pairs (e.g., \fBfilm\-grain=0:enable\-overlays=1:scd=1\fR).
Only used when \fB\-\-video\-codec libsvt\-av1\fR is selected.
.TP
.BR \-\-av1\-maxrate " " \fIRATE\fR
Optional peak bitrate cap for AV1 encodes (e.g., \fB20000k\fR). Passed
as \fB\-maxrate\fR to ffmpeg. Leave empty (default) for unconstrained CRF.
.TP
.BR \-\-av1\-bufsize " " \fISIZE\fR
VBV buffer size for AV1 rate control (e.g., \fB40000k\fR). Passed as
\fB\-bufsize\fR to ffmpeg. Typically set together with \fB\-\-av1\-maxrate\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-tonemap " , " \-\-no\-tonemap
Enable/disable HDR/HLG to SDR tone\-mapping.
.TP
.BR \-\-sdr\-force\-10bit " , " \-\-no\-sdr\-force\-10bit
Force/don't force 10\-bit output for SDR sources regardless of source bit
depth. Useful for animation where 8\-bit sources cause visible banding in
gradients. Default: disabled (follow source bit depth).
.TP
.BR \-\-video\-copy\-if\-compliant " , " \-\-no\-video\-copy\-if\-compliant
Copy/re\-encode video stream when source already matches target profile.
.TP
.BR \-\-max\-copy\-bitrate " " \fIRATE\fR
Maximum average bitrate for
.B \-\-video\-copy\-if\-compliant
to accept a stream copy. Sources exceeding this value are re\-encoded.
Uses ffprobe\(aqs reported bitrate when available, falling back to
.RI ( file_size\~\[mu]\~8\~/\~duration ).
Format: number with k suffix (e.g.,
.BR 50000k ).
Empty (default) disables the check.
.TP
.BR \-\-dv " , " \-\-no\-dv
Enable or disable Dolby Vision extraction/injection. Use \fB\-\-dv\fR to
re\-enable DV handling after a profile disables it (e.g., \fBanimation\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-allow\-dv\-fallback " , " \-\-no\-allow\-dv\-fallback
If DV handling fails, fall back to non\-DV output (default) or hard\-fail.
.TP
.BR \-\-dv\-convert\-p81 " , " \-\-no\-dv\-convert\-p81
Enable/disable automatic conversion to DV Profile 8.1 when native DV
injection fails. Default: enabled.
.SS Dolby Vision Fallback Chain
When DV handling is active, muxm attempts each step in order and advances
to the next only on failure:
.IP 1. 4n
Extract the RPU from the source and inject it into the encoded base layer
as\-is (native profile preserved).
.IP 2.
If step 1 fails and
.B \-\-dv\-convert\-p81
is enabled (default): convert the RPU to DV Profile 8.1 and retry
injection. Profile\ 5 and dual\-layer Profile\ 7 sources are the primary
targets for this conversion.
.IP 3.
If step 2 also fails (or
.B \-\-no\-dv\-convert\-p81
was given) and
.B \-\-allow\-dv\-fallback
is enabled (default): produce non\-DV output. The base\-layer encode is
kept; DV metadata is silently discarded. A warning is printed.
.IP 4.
If
.B \-\-no\-allow\-dv\-fallback
is set: exit with status\ 40. Use this in automated pipelines where
silent DV loss would be unacceptable.
.PP
Summary of the controlling flags:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-no\-dv
Skip DV handling entirely from the start (step 1 never runs).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-dv\-convert\-p81
Disable the P8.1 conversion attempt (step 2 skipped).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-allow\-dv\-fallback
Treat any DV failure as fatal rather than producing non\-DV output.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-\-conservative\-vbv " , " \-\-no\-conservative\-vbv
Enable/disable VBV guardrails that cap bitrate and buffer size per x265
level. Default: enabled.
.TP
.BR \-\-threads " " \fIN\fR
Number of threads for ffmpeg encoding.
.SH AUDIO OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-track " " \fIN\fR
Select specific audio stream index (0\-based).
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-lang\-pref " " \fILIST\fR
Preferred audio languages (comma\-separated, e.g., eng,spa).
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-force\-codec " " \fICODEC\fR
Force all audio to a specific codec (e.g., aac).
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-force\-bitrate " " \fIRATE\fR
Override the bitrate for all non\-lossless audio output (e.g., 256k).
Takes precedence over codec\-specific bitrate variables
.RB ( EAC3_BITRATE_5_1 ", " EAC3_BITRATE_7_1 ", " STEREO_BITRATE )
when set. The
.B streaming\-av1
profile sets this to 256k to pin Opus surround at an appropriate bitrate.
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-lossless\-passthrough " , " \-\-no\-audio\-lossless\-passthrough
Allow/disallow lossless codecs (TrueHD, DTS\-HD MA, FLAC) to copy through.
.TP
.BR \-\-stereo\-fallback " , " \-\-no\-stereo\-fallback
Enable/disable automatic AAC stereo track when primary >2ch.
.TP
.BR \-\-stereo\-bitrate " " \fIRATE\fR
Stereo track bitrate (e.g., 192k).
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-titles " , " \-\-no\-audio\-titles
Generate/suppress descriptive titles for audio streams
(e.g., \(lq5.1 Surround (E\-AC\-3)\(rq). Default: enabled.
.SS Audio Track Selection
When multiple audio streams exist, muxm scores each track and selects the highest.
Factors (in order of weight): language match against
.BR AUDIO_LANG_PREF ,
channel count, surround bonus (\[>=]6ch), codec preference order, and bitrate
(tie\-break). Tracks whose title contains "commentary", "descriptive", or
similar keywords receive a penalty
.RB ( AUDIO_SCORE_COMMENTARY_PENALTY ).
.PP
Scoring weights are configurable via
.IR .muxmrc :
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_LANG_BONUS " (default 150),"
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_CHANNEL_MULTIPLIER " (default 20),"
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_SURROUND_BONUS " (default 30),"
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_COMMENTARY_PENALTY " (default 200)."
.PP
Language preference is the strongest signal by default, ensuring that a
preferred\-language stereo track beats a foreign surround track. Reduce
.B AUDIO_SCORE_LANG_BONUS
to ~25 to prefer higher channel counts regardless of language.
.SS Multi\-Track Audio (Archival)
The
.B archive
profile uses multi\-track mode
.RB ( AUDIO_MULTI_TRACK=1 ),
which keeps all audio tracks that pass a subtractive filter instead of
scoring and selecting one. All surviving tracks are stream\-copied from
source (never transcoded). No stereo fallback is created.
.PP
Filters (configured via
.IR .muxmrc ):
.TP
.B AUDIO_LANG_PREF
When non\-empty, only tracks whose language matches the comma\-separated
list are kept. When empty (the default for
.BR archive ),
all languages pass.
.TP
.B AUDIO_KEEP_COMMENTARY
When 0 (the
.B archive
default), tracks whose title matches commentary or audio\-description
keywords are dropped. Set to 1 to keep them.
.PP
Multi\-track mode is automatically demoted to single\-track if
.B \-\-audio\-track
or
.B \-\-audio\-force\-codec
is set on the CLI (the explicit flag wins).
.SH SUBTITLE OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-subtitles
Disable all subtitle processing.
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-lang\-pref " " \fILIST\fR
Preferred subtitle languages (comma\-separated).
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-burn\-forced " , " \-\-no\-sub\-burn\-forced
Burn/don't burn forced subtitles into the video stream.
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-export\-external " , " \-\-no\-sub\-export\-external
Export/embed subtitles as external .srt files.
.IP
.BR Note :
When combined with
.BR \-\-sub\-burn\-forced ,
players that auto\-load .srt sidecars with matching filenames (VLC, some
smart TVs) will display both the burned forced subtitles and the loaded
external track, resulting in doubled text for foreign\-dialogue segments.
Use
.B \-\-no\-sub\-export\-external
if targeting these players.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-sub\-sdh
Exclude SDH/HI subtitle tracks.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-ocr
Disable PGS\(->SRT OCR.
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-preserve\-format " , " \-\-no\-sub\-preserve\-format
Preserve/convert native text subtitle formats (ASS/SSA).
When enabled and the output container is MKV, ASS/SSA subtitles are
stream\-copied in their native format, preserving positioning, fonts,
and typesetting. When disabled (or when the output container is MP4/MOV),
ASS/SSA subtitles are converted to plain\-text SRT.
The
.B animation
profile enables this by default.
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-preserve\-bitmap " , " \-\-no\-sub\-preserve\-bitmap
Preserve/discard PGS bitmap subtitles via stream\-copy when the output
container supports them (MKV).
When enabled (the default), PGS tracks are stream\-copied as\-is into
MKV output with no OCR; the
.B copy
codec is used for the subtitle stream.
When disabled, PGS tracks follow the normal OCR pipeline
.RB ( \-\-no\-ocr
or missing OCR tool will skip them entirely).
Has no effect for MP4/MOV output (PGS cannot be carried in those
containers) and is ignored when
.B \-\-sub\-burn\-forced
is active.
.TP
.BR \-\-ocr\-tool " " \fITOOL\fR
OCR backend: pgsrip or sub2srt.
.TP
.BR \-\-ocr\-lang " " \fILANG\fR
OCR language (default: eng).
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-ext\-subs
Disable external subtitle sidecar discovery. When set, muxm ignores any
subtitle files found alongside the source and uses only embedded streams.
.TP
.BR \-\-ext\-subs
Re\-enable external subtitle sidecar discovery after
.B \-\-no\-ext\-subs
(or after a config file sets
.BR EXT_SUB_ENABLED=0 ).
Discovery is on by default; this flag is only needed to override an
explicit disable.
.TP
.BR \-\-ext\-subs\-dir " " \fIDIR\fR
Search
.I DIR
for subtitle sidecar files instead of the source file's own directory.
The directory must exist; muxm exits with status\~11 if it does not.
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-sole\-ext\-fallback " , " \-\-no\-sub\-sole\-ext\-fallback
Enable or disable the sole\-sidecar language\-filter bypass (default: enabled).
When enabled, if the language filter would drop all subtitles but there is
exactly one external sidecar and zero embedded subtitle streams, that
sidecar is included regardless of its language tag.
This handles the common case of a sidecar with no language qualifier
(tagged
.B und
by default) that would otherwise be silently excluded by
.BR SUB_LANG_PREF .
Disable with
.B \-\-no\-sub\-sole\-ext\-fallback
or by setting
.B SUB_SOLE_EXT_FALLBACK=0
in
.IR .muxmrc .
.SS External Subtitle Discovery
muxm automatically scans the source file's directory (or the directory
given by
.BR \-\-ext\-subs\-dir )
for subtitle sidecar files whose basename begins with the source file's
stem followed by a dot.
.PP
Supported sidecar extensions:
.BR .srt ", " .ass ", " .ssa ", " .vtt ", " .sup ", " .idx
(\fB.idx\fR requires a matching
.B .sub
partner file in the same directory).
.PP
.B Filename parsing convention
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
\fI{stem}\fR[\fI.qualifier\fR\&...]\fI.ext\fR
.fi
.in
.PP
Qualifiers are the dot\-separated segments between the source stem and the
file extension, matched case\-insensitively:
.TP
.BR forced ", " signs ", " foreign
Track type is set to
.BR forced .
.TP
.BR sdh ", " hi ", " hearing ", " cc
Track type is set to
.BR sdh .
.TP
.I "2- or 3-letter alpha code"
Treated as an ISO\~639 language code and normalised to ISO\~639\-2/T
(e.g.,
.BR en " \(-> " eng ,
.BR es " \(-> " spa ).
.PP
Qualifiers not matching any of the above are ignored.
If no language qualifier is found, the language defaults to
.BR TAG_LANGUAGE_DEFAULT .
.PP
Examples:
.in +4n
.nf
movie.srt            \(-> lang=TAG_LANGUAGE_DEFAULT, type=full
movie.en.srt         \(-> lang=eng,  type=full
movie.forced.en.srt  \(-> lang=eng,  type=forced
movie.en.sdh.srt     \(-> lang=eng,  type=sdh
movie.fr.forced.sup  \(-> lang=fra,  type=forced
.fi
.in
.PP
Discovered external subtitles are merged with embedded subtitle streams
before any filtering takes place.
They then pass through the same filter pipeline as embedded tracks:
.BR SUB_LANG_PREF ", " SUB_INCLUDE_FORCED / FULL / SDH ", and " SUB_MAX_TRACKS .
Using
.B \-\-no\-subtitles
suppresses all subtitle processing including external sidecar discovery.
.SS Multi\-Track Subtitles
The
.BR archive ", " animation ", and " atv\-directplay\-animation
profiles use multi\-track subtitle mode
.RB ( SUB_MULTI_TRACK=1 ),
which keeps all subtitle tracks that pass a subtractive filter instead of
selecting one per type. Surviving tracks are stream\-copied from
source (no OCR, no intermediate files). The one exception is ASS/SSA
tracks when
.B SUB_PRESERVE_TEXT_FORMAT
is 0 (or the output container is MP4/MOV): these are converted inline
to SRT or mov_text respectively. All other codecs (PGS, SRT, VobSub)
are always stream\-copied.
.PP
Filters (configured via
.IR .muxmrc ):
.TP
.B SUB_LANG_PREF
When non\-empty, only tracks whose language matches the comma\-separated
list are kept. When empty (the default for
.BR archive ),
all languages pass.
.TP
.B SUB_INCLUDE_FORCED / SUB_INCLUDE_FULL / SUB_INCLUDE_SDH
Type filters. When 0, tracks of that type are excluded. All three
default to 1 in
.BR archive ", " animation ", and " atv\-directplay\-animation .
.TP
.B SUB_MAX_TRACKS
Maximum number of subtitle tracks to keep (applied after all other
filters as a cap). Defaults to 99 for
.BR archive ,
6 for
.BR animation " and " atv\-directplay\-animation .
.PP
Bitmap subtitles (PGS, VobSub) that cannot be muxed into the target
container (e.g., PGS into MP4) are silently skipped.
.BR archive ", " animation ", and " atv\-directplay\-animation
use MKV (or passthrough MKV), which handles all subtitle formats.
.PP
Multi\-track subtitle mode is automatically demoted to single\-track if
.B \-\-sub\-burn\-forced
is set on the CLI (burn\-in requires extracting and processing a single
forced track).
.SH OUTPUT OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-output\-ext " " \fIEXT\fR
Output container: mp4|m4v|mov|mkv. Default: mp4.
Profiles with container passthrough
.RB ( archive ", " atv\-directplay\-hq ", " atv\-directplay\-animation )
set this to empty, deriving the output container from the source file extension
(mkv\(->mkv, mp4\(->mp4, etc.).
Sources with unsupported containers fall back to mkv.
.B \-\-output\-ext
on the CLI always overrides passthrough resolution.
.PP
When an explicit output filename is provided with a recognised extension
(\fB.mp4\fR, \fB.m4v\fR, \fB.mov\fR, \fB.mkv\fR), the container format is
inferred from that extension as if \fB\-\-output\-ext\fR had been passed. An
explicit \fB\-\-output\-ext\fR flag always takes precedence. This inference is
disabled in multi\-profile mode.
.TP
.BR \-\-keep\-chapters " , " \-\-no\-keep\-chapters
Keep/strip chapter markers.
.TP
.BR \-\-strip\-metadata " , " \-\-no\-strip\-metadata
Strip/keep non\-essential metadata.
.TP
.BR \-\-profile\-comment " , " \-\-no\-profile\-comment
Embed/suppress profile tagline in container comment metadata. Default: on.
When a profile is active, a short descriptive comment is written to the
output container's comment field (MP4 \(cocmt, MKV COMMENT).
.TP
.BR \-\-skip\-if\-ideal " , " \-\-no\-skip\-if\-ideal
Skip processing if source already matches profile requirements.
.PP
The following conditions prevent a source from being considered ideal, even when
this flag is set: video codec or pixel format mismatch; container mismatch;
\fBVIDEO_COPY_IF_COMPLIANT=0\fR (profile requires re\-encode);
\fBTONEMAP_HDR_TO_SDR=1\fR on an HDR source; \fBADD_STEREO_IF_MULTICH=1\fR
with surround audio (stereo fallback needed); discovered external subtitle
sidecar files that need muxing in.
.TP
.BR \-\-report\-json " , " \-\-no\-report\-json
Generate/suppress JSON report alongside output.
.TP
.BR \-\-checksum " , " \-\-no\-checksum
Write/suppress a checksum sidecar for the final output.
The algorithm is controlled by
.BR \-\-checksum\-algo .
.TP
.BR \-\-checksum\-algo " \fIalgo\fR"
Select the checksum algorithm.
Allowed values:
.BR sha256
(default — writes a
.I .sha256
sidecar using
.B sha256sum
or
.BR "shasum \-a 256" ),
.BR blake2b
(writes a
.I .b2
sidecar using
.BR b2sum ),
and
.BR auto
(prefers
.B b2sum
if available, falls back to sha256).
Specifying
.B \-\-checksum\-algo
implies
.BR \-\-checksum .
.TP
.BR \-\-disk\-check " , " \-\-no\-disk\-check
Enable/disable the smart disk\-space preflight (default: on).
When enabled, muxm estimates the encoded output size from the source bitrate,
CRF value, preset, and audio configuration before encoding begins, then warns
if the available space on the output or temp volume appears insufficient.
Estimation uses per\-codec CRF\-to\-bitrate\-ratio tables and preset size
multipliers; a 25\ % safety margin and a floor of
.BR DISK_FREE_WARN_GB
are applied.
Set
.B DISK_CHECK=0
in
.I .muxmrc
or pass
.B \-\-no\-disk\-check
to silence the warning.
.TP
.BR \-K ", " \-\-keep\-temp\-always
Keep temporary workdir even on success.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-keep\-temp
Keep temporary workdir on failure.
.SH QUICK TEST OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-skip\-video " , " \-\-skip\-audio " , " \-\-skip\-subs
Disable respective pipelines (useful for quick tests).
.SH FFMPEG OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-ffmpeg\-loglevel " " \fILEVEL\fR
Set ffmpeg log verbosity (e.g., quiet, error, warning, info). Default: error.
.TP
.BR \-\-ffprobe\-loglevel " " \fILEVEL\fR
Set ffprobe log verbosity. Default: error.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-hide\-banner
Show the ffmpeg/ffprobe startup banner (hidden by default).
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-overwrite
Do not overwrite existing intermediate files (ffmpeg overwrites by default).
.TP
.BR \-\-replace\-source
Replace the original source file with the encoded output. Prompts for
confirmation before proceeding. Requires an interactive terminal (stdin
must be a TTY); in non\-interactive shells (scripts, pipelines), this flag
is rejected with an error directing you to use
.BR \-\-force\-replace\-source .
.TP
.BR \-\-force\-replace\-source
Replace the original source file with the encoded output without prompting
for confirmation. This is the scripting\-friendly variant of
.BR \-\-replace\-source .
.PP
.B Source collision auto\-versioning:
When the derived output path matches the source file and neither
.B \-\-replace\-source
nor
.B \-\-force\-replace\-source
is given, muxm automatically appends a version number to avoid collision:
.IR movie(1).mp4 ", " movie(2).mp4 ,
etc.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B muxm Movie.mkv
Encode using default settings (no profile). Output name is
derived from input. Use \fB\-\-profile\fR for device\-optimized settings.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile atv\-directplay\-hq Movie.mkv
Encode for Apple TV direct play with Dolby Vision P8.1, E\-AC\-3 surround,
AAC stereo fallback, and burned forced subtitles.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile streaming\-hevc \-\-audio\-lang\-pref spa,eng Movie.mkv
Encode for Plex/Jellyfin streaming, preferring Spanish audio over English.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile archive Movie.mkv
Archival remux: copy video/audio without re\-encoding, preserve Dolby Vision
and lossless audio. Skips the file if it already matches.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile animation \-\-crf 14 Anime.mkv
Anime encode with animation\-tuned x265, overriding the profile's CRF 16
down to 14 for higher quality.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile universal Movie.mkv
Maximum compatibility: tone\-map HDR to SDR, H.264, AAC stereo, burned
forced subs. Plays on virtually any device.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-crf 18 \-p slow \-\-no\-subtitles Movie.mkv out.mp4
Custom encode without any profile: CRF 18, slow preset, strip all
subtitles, explicit output filename.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-ext\-subs\-dir /media/subs Movie.mkv
Encode Movie.mkv and pick up subtitle sidecar files from /media/subs
instead of the same directory as the source.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-no\-ext\-subs Movie.mkv
Encode Movie.mkv using only subtitle tracks embedded in the source;
ignore any .srt/.ass/.sup files in the same directory.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile hdr10\-hq \-\-audio\-lossless\-passthrough Movie.mkv
HDR10 encode keeping lossless audio (TrueHD/DTS\-HD MA) passed through
instead of transcoding.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile av1\-hq Movie.mkv
High\-quality AV1 encode via SVT\-AV1. CRF 20, lossless audio, HDR10
preserved. MKV output. Requires ffmpeg built with SVT\-AV1 support.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile streaming\-av1 Movie.mkv
AV1 streaming encode. CRF 30, Opus surround, MP4.
Smaller files than streaming\-hevc on AV1\-capable clients.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-dry\-run \-\-profile streaming\-hevc Movie.mkv
Preview what muxm would do without actually encoding. Creates placeholder
files and prints the planned pipeline.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile atv\-directplay\-hq \-\-print\-effective\-config
Show every resolved setting after config files and profile merge, then exit.
Useful for debugging config precedence.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-create\-config user streaming\-hevc
Generate a ~/.muxmrc pre\-filled with streaming\-hevc profile defaults. Edit to
taste; CLI flags still override everything.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-setup
Full first\-time setup: install dependencies, the manual page, and tab
completion all at once.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-install\-dependencies
Check for and install all required/optional tools (ffmpeg, dovi_tool,
pgsrip, etc.) via Homebrew and pipx.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-install\-man
Install this manual page so \fBman muxm\fR works.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-install\-completions
Install bash/zsh tab completion. Adds a source line to your shell RC files.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error (config write failure, dependency check failure, unhandled runtime error).
.TP
.B 10
Missing required tool (ffmpeg, ffprobe, or jq not found).
.TP
.B 11
Invalid arguments, unknown option or profile, bad input/output path, or security
check failure (control characters in filename, source/output collision).
.TP
.B 12
Source file unusable: no video streams, corrupt metadata, or ffprobe JSON parse failure.
.TP
.B 40
Video encode or Dolby Vision RPU extraction/validation failure (with fallback disabled).
.TP
.B 41
DV RPU injection failure, intermediate file validation failure, or final mux failure.
.TP
.B 42
Video pipeline structural error (e.g., \-\-skip\-video with no alternative, missing
or corrupt encoded video stream).
.TP
.B 43
Audio transcode or copy failure.
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by user (SIGINT / Ctrl\-C).
.TP
.B 143
Terminated by signal (SIGTERM).
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI/etc/.muxmrc\fR
System\-wide configuration (sourced first).
.TP
\fI~/.muxmrc\fR
Per\-user configuration (sourced second).
.TP
\fI./.muxmrc\fR
Per\-project configuration (sourced last, from
.BR $PWD ).
.PP
Configuration files use shell variable syntax and are sourced as bash
scripts. CLI flags always override config files. Profiles override
config files but are overridden by CLI flags.
.TP
\fI~/.muxm/muxm\-completion.bash\fR
Tab\-completion script installed by \fB\-\-install\-completions\fR.
.SH CONFIGURATION
All behavior can be tuned via shell variables set in
.I .muxmrc
files. Run
.B muxm \-\-create\-config user
to generate a fully\-commented template at
.I ~/.muxmrc
with every variable documented and preset for a chosen profile.
Variables set by the selected profile are uncommented; all others are
commented with their defaults.
.PP
Major variable groups:
.TP
.B Video
.BR CRF_VALUE ", " PRESET_VALUE ", " VIDEO_CODEC ", " X265_PARAMS_BASE ", " X264_PARAMS_BASE ", "
.BR LEVEL_VALUE ", " CONSERVATIVE_VBV ", " FORCE_CHROMA_420 ", "
.BR SDR_USE_10BIT_IF_SRC_10BIT ", " SDR_FORCE_10BIT ", "
.BR HDR_TARGET_PIXFMT ", " MAX_COPY_BITRATE ", "
.BR TONEMAP_HDR_TO_SDR ", " TONEMAP_FILTER .
.TP
.B Dolby Vision
.BR DISABLE_DV ", " ALLOW_DV_FALLBACK ", " DV_CONVERT_TO_P81_IF_FAIL .
.TP
.B Audio
.BR AUDIO_LANG_PREF ", " AUDIO_CODEC_PREFERENCE ", "
.BR AUDIO_TRACK_OVERRIDE ", " AUDIO_FORCE_CODEC ", " AUDIO_FORCE_BITRATE ", "
.BR MAX_AUDIO_CHANNELS ", " ADD_STEREO_IF_MULTICH ", "
.BR STEREO_BITRATE ", " EAC3_BITRATE_5_1 ", " EAC3_BITRATE_7_1 ", "
.BR AUDIO_LOSSLESS_PASSTHROUGH ", " INCLUDE_AUDIO_TITLES .
.TP
.B Audio scoring
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_LANG_BONUS ", " AUDIO_SCORE_CHANNEL_MULTIPLIER ", "
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_SURROUND_BONUS ", " AUDIO_SCORE_COMMENTARY_PENALTY .
.TP
.B Multi\-track audio (archival)
.BR AUDIO_MULTI_TRACK ", " AUDIO_KEEP_COMMENTARY .
.TP
.B Subtitles
.BR SUB_LANG_PREF ", " SUB_INCLUDE_FORCED ", " SUB_INCLUDE_FULL ", "
.BR SUB_INCLUDE_SDH ", " SUB_MAX_TRACKS ", " SUB_BURN_FORCED ", "
.BR SUB_EXPORT_EXTERNAL ", " SUB_PRESERVE_TEXT_FORMAT ", "
.BR SUB_PRESERVE_BITMAP ", "
.BR SUB_ENABLE_OCR ", " SUB_OCR_TOOL ", "
.BR SUB_OCR_LANG .
.TP
.B Multi\-track subtitles (archival)
.BR SUB_MULTI_TRACK .
.TP
.B External subtitle discovery
.BR EXT_SUB_ENABLED " (default\ 1; set to 0 to disable sidecar discovery),"
.BR EXT_SUB_DIR " (directory to scan; defaults to source file's directory),"
.BR SUB_SOLE_EXT_FALLBACK " (default\ 1; set to 0 to disable the sole\-sidecar language\-filter bypass)."
.TP
.B Output / operational
.BR OUTPUT_EXT ", " KEEP_CHAPTERS ", " STRIP_METADATA ", "
.BR SKIP_IF_IDEAL ", " REPORT_JSON ", " CHECKSUM ", "
.BR DISK_FREE_WARN_GB " (default\ 5; minimum free\-space floor in GB),"
.BR DISK_CHECK " (default\ 1; set to 0 to disable smart disk preflight),"
.BR TAG_LANGUAGE_DEFAULT .
.TP
.B ffmpeg / ffprobe
.BR FFMPEG_LOGLEVEL ", " FFPROBE_LOGLEVEL ", " FFMPEG_HIDE_BANNER ", "
.BR FFMPEG_OVERWRITE ", " THREADS .
.TP
.B VBV guardrails
.BR LEVEL_VBV_4_1_MAXRATE ", " LEVEL_VBV_4_1_BUFSIZE ", "
.BR LEVEL_VBV_5_0_MAXRATE ", " LEVEL_VBV_5_0_BUFSIZE ", "
.BR LEVEL_VBV_5_1_MAXRATE ", " LEVEL_VBV_5_1_BUFSIZE ", "
.BR LEVEL_VBV_5_2_MAXRATE ", " LEVEL_VBV_5_2_BUFSIZE .
.TP
.B X264_PARAMS_BASE
Base x264 parameter string for H.264 encodes. Appended to the ffmpeg
\fB\-x264\-params\fR flag. Used by the \fByoutube\-upload\fR profile.
Default: empty.
.PP
Use
.B \-\-print\-effective\-config
to inspect the fully\-resolved configuration after all layers merge.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DEBUG
Set to
.B 1
to enable bash trace output
.RB ( "set \-x" )
and suppress automatic temp\-directory cleanup. Useful for diagnosing
pipeline failures.
.TP
.B TESSDATA_PREFIX
Path to Tesseract OCR language data. Required by
.B pgsrip
for PGS subtitle OCR. Typically set to the Homebrew tessdata directory
(e.g.,
.IR /opt/homebrew/share/tessdata ).
Run
.B muxm \-\-install\-dependencies
to check and configure.
.SH NOTES
.SS Security: .muxmrc sourcing
Configuration files are sourced as shell scripts and can execute
arbitrary code. The project\-level
.I ./.muxmrc
is sourced from
.BR $PWD ,
so a malicious file placed in a directory you
.B cd
into could run arbitrary commands. This follows the same trust model as
.BR Makefile ", " .envrc " (direnv),"
and similar developer tooling. Only source project\-level configs in
directories you trust.
.SS Double\-dash separator
Use
.B \-\-
to mark the end of options. This is necessary when the source filename
begins with a hyphen:
.IP
.B muxm \-\-profile streaming\-hevc \-\- \-unusual\-name.mkv
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B Required
\fBffmpeg\fR, \fBffprobe\fR \(em core encoding and media inspection.
.br
\fBjq\fR \(em JSON parsing for stream metadata and reporting.
.br
\fBbc\fR \(em arithmetic evaluation for frame\-rate and bitrate calculations.
.TP
.B Optional
\fBffmpeg with libass\fR (\fBffmpeg\-full\fR on Homebrew) \(em required for
subtitle burn\-in via \fB\-\-sub\-burn\-forced\fR. The standard \fBffmpeg\fR
package works for all other features.
.br
\fBdovi_tool\fR \(em Dolby Vision RPU extraction/injection. DV handling is
automatically disabled if missing.
.br
\fBMP4Box\fR (gpac) \(em DV container\-level signaling verification.
Detected at runtime as \fBmp4box\fR or \fBMP4Box\fR.
.br
\fBtesseract\fR \(em OCR engine required by \fBpgsrip\fR for PGS bitmap
subtitle conversion.
.br
\fBpgsrip\fR or \fBsub2srt\fR \(em PGS bitmap subtitle OCR to SRT.
Configurable via \fB\-\-ocr\-tool\fR.
.PP
Run \fBmuxm \-\-install\-dependencies\fR to check for and install all
tools via Homebrew and pipx.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ffmpeg (1),
.BR ffprobe (1),
.BR dovi_tool (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR MP4Box (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/TheBluWiz/MuxMaster/issues
.UE .
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025\(en2026 Jamey Wicklund (theBluWiz).
.PP
MuxMaster\(tm Freeware License v1.0.1 \(em
\(lqDo what you want, just don't pretend I warranty the universe.\(rq
.SH AUTHOR
Jamey Wicklund (theBluWiz).
